Al jazer journalist Sam abaka is killed
in Gaza after an Israeli drone targets a
school he was reporting from our
colleague is wounded in that same attack
Israel's war on Gaza has been the
deadliest Conflict for media workers
ever recorded so why has the death toll
been so high and is Israel trying to
silence the messenger this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm D
nauga Israel's war on Gaza is the
deadliest for media workers ever
recorded that's according to press
Freedom groups at least 90 have been
killed since the conflict began on
October the 7th the International
Federation of journalists says around
three quarters of all deaths of media
professionals worldwide in 2023 have
been in Gaza and they've mainly been
Palestinians covering the story as the
Israeli military has prevented
international news outlets from entering
the Gaza Strip the latest to be killed
is samit Abu Daka who was reporting from
a un run School in the southern city of
Kan yunes when it was targeted in a
drone strike alzer's Gaza bureau chief
was also injured in the same attack
International calls for accountability
for Israel's killing of journalists
during the war are growing a White House
spokesperson expressed Washington's
deepest sympathies and condolences for
the killing of Sam Abu Daka and Riyad
Mansour who's the Palestinian
representative to the UN said enough is
enough we'll be discussing why the war
in Gaza has been so deadly for
journalists in a moment but first fer
yakar
reports this is the price paid by Samar
Abu DEA for showing the world what's
happening in Gaza surrounded by family
and colleagues the body of the veteran
Al jazer cameraman was laid to rest on
Saturday along with his protective gear
he had been wearing that clearly
identified him as a journalist sammer
had been with his colleague W aladu
covering the aftermath of an Israeli
attack at a un run School in can yunes
that's when an Israeli drone struck
samur was hit by shrapnel and bled for
more than 5 hours waiting for an
ambulance it couldn't get to him sooner
because medical staff and rescue teams
were prevented from accessing the area
by the Israeli
military also injured by the shrapnel
wall made it to hospital knowing nothing
of Sam's
fate we can't tell what exactly happened
I only felt a big impact I fell down and
lost my helmet and my microphone I tried
to gather all my strength and was only
barely able to stand up I was feeling
dizzy and losing my
balance it is another example that those
covering the Carnage in Gaza are also
living through
it w lost his wife son daughter and
one-year-old grandson to an Israeli air
strike on a house they were Sheltering
in on October 25th and 6 days later Al
jazer broadcast engineer Muhammad Abu
alaman lost 19 members of his family
killed by Israeli missiles targeting the
densely populated jabalia refugee
camp then on December 6th Maman Al
sharafi lost 22 members of his family
when an Israeli bomb destroyed their
shelter he says civil defense teams
couldn't reach their
bodies these are only the stories of Al
jazer journalists in Gaza at least 90
media workers have been killed there
since the War Began this is the
deadliest conflict of four journalists
that the committee to protect uh
journalist has ever documented and we've
been doing this work for more than 30
years by that we mean the highest number
of journalist casualties in such a short
space of time journalists are civilians
they must never be targeted in a war we
continue to reiterate that with
governments around the world um because
we need journalists we need them to be
out eyes near for what's happening in
Gaza and it's not just Gaza where
journalists are Under Fire for covering
the War the Reuters news agency says an
investigation has revealed that its
cameraman Isam Abdullah appears to have
been deliberately killed by Israeli tank
fire while covering fighting on the
Lebanon Israel border six other
journalists were wounded in the same
incident Al jazer has accused Israel of
deliberately targeting its journalists
it's asked the international criminal
court to investigate the killing of
Shireen Abu akla in May last year she
was shot dead by Israeli forces while
covering a raid in the occup West
Bank Israel has yet to charge or hold
anyone accountable for any of these
killings fakar Al jazer for Inside
Story well samed Abu Daka was the 13th
Al jaaz journalists killed in their line
of work since the network launched in
1996 and a statement released by the AL
jazer media Network condemns in the
strongest terms the Israeli drone attack
on a Gaza school that resulted in the
killing of the cameraman Sam Abu Daka it
adds the network holds Israel
accountable for systematically targeting
and killing Al jazer journalists and
their families and extends its sincere
condolences to Sam Abu daka's family in
Gaza and Belgium Al jazer urges the
International Community and the
international criminal court to take
immediate action to hold the Israeli
government and Military
[Music]
accountable
for today's discussion we have with us
our guests here in Doha we're joined by
Al jazer journalist Tam mishal from
Oxford is Jim bumel who's from the
International Federation of journalists
and also joining us from the UK is
testino Marinello who's a professor of
law at Liverpool John Moors University
and who's also a member of the legal
team for Gaza victims before the ICC
that's the international criminal court
welcome to you all thanks for your time
tamed I'll start with you as Al jazer
the entire family here Mourns the death
of Sam Abu Daka in Gaza you knew him
very well you worked with him in Gaza
tell us about him and your reaction to
his death thank you very much Daren it's
really a sad moment I worked in in Gaza
for more than eight years as a Gaza
correspondent with this great team
including uh our martyr samur abua Sam a
will professional journalist
cameraman and uh video editor he joined
Al jazer since more than 20 years he
covered most of the incidents took place
in Gaza and I was working with him also
in outside Gaza and in in a professional
mission for Al missions for Al jazer
Samar Abu Daka he's an example of the
Palestinian journalist and Al jazer
journalist in Gaza who were he was
determined to go on in his work despite
all of these difficulties but what did
what did happen to to him yesterday was
an a crime and part of what we we
believe a genocide targeting the
Palestinians civilians including the
journalist tamr what are you learning
about what exactly happened from the
time that Samir and wa and the team went
to that school in the south of the Gaza
Strip until then he was pronounced dead
what have you learned about that yes
according to our crew on in the field W
and S went to area which is a civilians
area to a un school to cover the
aftermath of Israeli attack which
targeted that area in Kan Yunis in
southern Gaza Strip suddenly this area
has been targeted by an Israeli
missile causing an injury
for Sam abaka and other civilians in the
area W managed to walk out of the area
towards Naser hospital but samur left a
bleeding in the area and for five hours
we contacted all the concerned
humanitarian parties to help us to send
an ambulance to rescue him and take him
to the hospital we contacted the Red
Cross Ricans and other organizations but
unfortunately when the rescue team
arrived to the the area they found that
samur during these hours of bleeding he
managed to walk and to move a few meters
from the area where he was first injured
and after that an Israeli drone has
targeted him second time and the Missile
hit him directly so this is an example
of what did happen to Sam and the
journalist that he was targeted targeted
deliberate Target it was an
assassination operation Dar to be honest
in describing this what did happen to
samur according to our colleagues in the
ground in this incident three of the
rescue uh teams from the civil defense
uh uh the the the the rescue Medical
Teams on the ground they have been
killed so what we are what we are
talking that Sam Abu Daka is an example
of more than 90 Palestinian journalists
have being killed since this war has
started on Gaza in in a number which
reflects that the Palestinian journalist
are a targets for the Israeli operations
and there is no place safe and they are
not safe in their working on the ground
okay uh let me bring in uh Jim from the
International Federation of journalists
Jim if you can comment on what's
happened to uh to Sam and um the there's
a report that the ifj has put out which
says that since 7th of October more than
one journalist a day has been killed
during the war in Gaza I mean this is
unprecedented as you Des describe it is
it
not thank you very much for having me
um there is a kind of a in terms of
what's happening right now of course
there there are statistics and we're not
into NE crunchin also they're very
important uh the situation in the West
Bank and in Gaza uh has been uh you know
producing Journal is been murdered for
for the last 40 years so can can I start
by uh you know in a conveying to the
family of the colleague Gad yesterday
abaka uh sincere condolences not not
only from the ifj but from the 600,000
journalists that the ifj represent in
170 countries uh in the last um three
months you know we have been uh you know
very much involved in reporting what's
going on and there is huge amount of
empathy uh from from journalists for
what's happening in Gaza uh we represent
them uh we uh through our affiliate the
Palestine journalist Syndicate many of
those journalists that have died are our
members and we work day in day out uh to
uh to to follow with with all the
international institution on what's
going on and we have been doing it as I
said for 40 years uh you know up until
the 7th of October uh and since the
record began uh we have uh on uh our
statistics some 50 journalists that have
been died and of course the difference
with what's been happening now is not is
not you know uh during kind of decades
it's happened is around 70 days that's
okay so Tim look obviously I mean the
way that Israel the way that Israel is
going about this war is having a huge
impact on civilians thousands and
thousands of civilians are being killed
and now we have this High number of
journalists being killed in your view
from the International Federation of
journalists why is it that journalists
are paying such a heavy
price well certainly I mean for for us
and uh for the international Committee
of journalists that that is unacceptable
um there have been cases like in Iraq
where journalists died and in fact the
number in Iraq was much higher
statistically but nevertheless that that
that was a kind of different type of war
and it lasted you know for quite a long
time uh as we have said all along uh the
Israelis have been targeting journalists
it happened in cases that happened 30
years ago but it's happening right now
uh and of course one of the the very
immediate kind of explanation of that is
that uh they are targeting journalists
because they don't want to to to to as
as a as as an attempt you know to try to
cow them you know from doing the job
that they're doing every day and we
always said that those journalists are
very brave in terms of what they're
doing and conveying to the world what is
happening in Gaza so that is an
explanation that it is you know
targeting them so those pictures do not
come out uh uh anymore or are somehow uh
subdued and do not give the truth about
what's happening in in Gaza okay let's
bring in testino uh let me ask you this
actually let me put this to you testino
we heard from uh the National Security
Council spokesperson John Kirby over in
the US after Sam Abu daka's killing and
he said we still don't have any
indications that Israel are deliberately
targeting journalists in an ongoing
Dynamic conflict such as this we're not
going to make ourselves judge and jury
over every single air strike and every
single kinetic event that happens on the
battlefield what's your response to this
statement from John Kirby and when you
hear such statements from officials does
it give you any hope that there will be
accountability well first of all many
thanks for having me I think that at
this stage has already reported by
number of international organization
Human Rights group when independent
experts there is already enough evidence
for the prosecutor of the international
criminal court to start an investigation
in relation to uh the war crime of uh
indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian objects and under
International humanitarian law article
79 of the additional protocol one to the
Geneva Convention journalists have
considered as as a civilian so I mean in
contct to what uh is been reported by us
authorities I think that there is
evidence to argue that the Israeli
Authority in this war are putting in
place in this create attacks against
civilians including journalist and
against civilian object but to be honest
this is not a novelty even in the
previous Wars against Gaza has widely
documented by un independent commissions
of inquiry U Israel the IDF has
committed has put in place
indiscriminate Del liberate attacks
against civilian and civilian objects
without forgetting that in 2021 in Gaza
the the Israeli
authorities intentionally targeted the
media tower the famous so-called Al
jazer Tower which was not a military
Target at least the isra Israeli
authority never proved that that was a
military a military Target so um I will
conclude by saying that these attacks so
far
deliberate but this can let's just be
clear let's just be clear for a moment
so intentionally intentionally targeting
journalists as well as civilians of
course is considered a war crime is it
not under international criminal law
under International humanitarian law
first of all it's a serious violation of
the Geneva Convention so it's a
violation that entails State
responsibility is a violation of
international human rights law the right
to life and it's a war crime on the
article8 of the stute of the
international but then when Israel
testino when Israel in the first weeks
of the War uh issues a statement the
Army issued a statement to international
news agency saying that it could not
guarantee the safety of their
journalists operating in the Gaza Strip
I mean this is open contempt for
international humanitarian law is it not
is Israel trying to absolve itself from
any responsibility here and does that
work well that's a very arguable under
international law has an occupying power
in God even before the war Israel has
the o obligation under International
humanitarian law to protect civilians
and that obligation has very clearly
breached that does not solve Israel from
any accountability both as a state and
as individual criminal responsibility I
mean the St of the international
criminal court does not uh establish an
interrogation to this I mean the
question here is to prove whether the
killing has been willful in other words
whether there was awareness that the
person the journalist had a protected
status and that can be established only
by an independent investigation which
means not an investigation by domestic
authorities in Israel which have prune
like in the case of Shirak that they do
not have any intent to put in place any
effective independent and impartial
investigation in relation to the
killings of journalist by the Israeli
Security Forces yeah okay I'm glad you
brought up our other colleague sharen
abak Tam let me come back to you uh you
know we we we witnessed and and covered
the the killing of our colleague sharen
Abu in May of last year while she was
reporting on an Israeli military
operation in the occupied West Bank I
mean tamed from your perspective as a
journalist as someone who's experienced
the dangers of working in these War
zones what will it take to stop the
violence against journalists and hold
those you know perpetrators to account
in your
opinion you know Daren what is what is
sad and shocking when you call and
contact your colleagues on the ground
they are saying and their voice who is
next in the list everyone from our
colleagues and from the Palestinian
journalists who are covering this war
expecting to be the coming Israeli
Target and un unfortunately they don't
feel on the ground that there is a real
intervention to protect them they
believe that they are targets for the
Israeli operations and there is no any
accountability and this is was clear in
uh sh AB case even the Israeli Army it
changed The Narrative of sh Issue four
or five times they ignore their
responsibility first then they accused
the Palestinian militants then they said
by mistake then they say we will open an
investigation so they Target and they
deny this Target and this what happened
in the ground more than 90 more than 90
journalists have been killed and
hundreds of Palestinian journalists
their families members of their their
families have been killed and in
addition to that Dar the Israeli Army
and the Israeli occupation forces since
more than 70 days in Gaza they don't
allow for any foreign journalist to go
into Gaza to cover this this what is
happening on the ground so it's the
question now why the Israeli targeting
the journalist because clearly they
don't want the fact the truth to be
appeared on the screens of the
television and to be seen by the
word let's put that question to Tim and
Oxford uh from from the data that uh
your organization has collected the
International Federation of journalists
um tell tell us in fact how deadly this
war has been
Tim well certainly um
the the data is very clear in terms of
the the sheer number of the journalists
that that have died um and and we say
that most of them have been
targeted um however I think if I just
come back on this question of how Israel
uh kind of treat uh in a Palestinian
journalist our Union uh in in Palestine
the Palestine journalist Syndicate they
prod use very accurate figures on the
violation against journalists year in
year out they have been doing it
quarterly for the last four or five
years and they range from detention pre
prevention of coverage and so on and so
forth I wouldn't go into the detail and
the reality is that whenever as an
organization representing those
journalist we try to engage uh the
Israeli
authorities uh they they don't even
consider them to be to be gener they're
not within their radar I mean even the
uh the the uh the the identity which is
the the identity card that's produced by
the ifj is recognized throughout the
world and that's what really recognize a
journalist as being a Bonafide gatherer
of information and should be protected
uh under the international human
humanitarian law and and that card is
not recognized in Israel
and and we had for 20 years all kind of
discussion trying to find a way that
they will feel that they are uh
responsible and the human humanitarian
laws you know for for the the well-being
of these journalists and they refuse to
do it so it's not something so what more
can you do what more can organizations
like yours do
Jim well uh of course we continue um you
know trying to put pressure on the
Israelis only recently our general
secretary travel to ramala and try to to
meet them uh you know to discuss what's
happening to journalists they don't even
respond to what we are sending out we
have taken the road of going to the
international criminal court and maybe
there's something that we should discuss
what going on there yeah let's bring in
testino then let's let's bring in uh uh
treso tell us about because I can tell
you I can tell you what we have been
doing you ask we have been doing
sure okay we have taken cases in in
including the case for Sharin abaka and
what are we at with the international
criminal court Kim KH only recently has
visited the West Bank and there's no
nothing very clear and positive about
what they're doing is it a question of
resources is it question let bring in
testino then testino comment on this I
mean not only obviously we know that
there is a case for our colleague
Shireen abak filed at the international
criminal court
um and um presumably there will be other
cases when it comes to the targeting of
journalists will the families will the
organizations be able to get Justice at
the
IC well that's a very interesting
question I mean what we know for sure is
that uh the investigation into the
Palestine situation was open in March
20121 but since the prosecutor kharim
Khan took office in June 2021 there is
never been any effective investigation
into Palestine situation effective
investigation means also in relation to
the Palestinian journalist killed by the
Israeli authorities the prosecutor has
not formally engaged with the victims of
the situation including I guess victim's
family of the Palestinian journalist the
prosecutor as we could argue has
discover the existence of this
investigation after the 7th of October
when he has issued a few statements he
has visited Israel and Palestine and he
also visited the rougher border uh this
is a welcome development but at the same
time he continues to give signals
messages of double standards he has been
very prompt in meeting with Israeli
victims from the 7th of October attack
and that's part of his mandate but he's
been very reluctant in meeting with
Palestinian victims and still is not
really clearly mentioned in any
effective concrete case that he wants to
investigate and prosecute including
cases against
journalist International bodies seem to
fail the Palestinians testino over and
over and not just in the international
criminal court but like we see in the
security Council for example what other
avenues are
there well at the international level
there are not other avenues because at
least from an individual criminal
responsibility the ICC is the only one
is a court of last resort which
intervenes only when domestic
jurisdiction fail and we know that
Israel as as we said before the other
alternatives are for State
responsibility in particular the
international court of justice which has
the competence also to establish whether
or not the Israeli authorities are
responsible for genocide let me conclude
that then cases like this can be brought
before Domestic Court states that have
specific provisions on universal
jurisdiction they could be competent to
address these serious violation of
international humanarian law Jim I'll
come to you briefly because I see that
you want to jump in there and say
something in 30 seconds if you don't
mind yeah well certainly I mean the
question of the international crial
court and and the and the people who are
in charge of it and what they have been
doing or have been saying is very
important and and we have uh and until
recently pointed out you know to the
prosecutor and other kind of uh uh
officials within the court as to why
they have deployed so much resources on
the question of the Ukraine I'm not
making a hierarchy of of victims of
course they should do but why on the one
case they did put huge resources uh many
officers 4050 you know going straight to
the Ukraine you know issuing arrest
warrant and in this case they're
refusing to do it and there is that is a
big question of whether the court itself
is being um perhaps you know kind of put
under pressure by some of its component
I mean the United States is not even the
component of it but others like the UK
they are and we hear every day the kind
of pressure that they're putting on the
court for not making a move on this and
that is a big question mark of for
whether the court is capable you know of
doing what they are set up to do or not
we'll have to leave it there thank you
so much to my guests for joining us Tam
M Jim bu and trino Marinello we thank
you for your time thanks for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website al.com for further
discussion you can go to our Facebook
page that's facebook.com/ AJ insid story
join the conversation on X our handle is
AJ inside story from myself and the
whole team here in delha thanks for
watching and bye-bye for
[Music]
now